---
title: My Exercise Method
author: gregdan3
date: 2021-07-12
description:
published: true
---

## Foreword

I have exercised more or less at different points in my life, and my weight has
swung to shocking highs and lows with that exercise or lack thereof. In February
2021, I decided to get a handle on my exercise practices with concentrated
effort. However, as most people will tell you, deciding to exercise and actually
exercising are different beasts. The trick I used to get into exercising
regularly may not work for everyone, but it worked astonishingly well for me.

If you're gym-averse, I hope this guide can be helpful to you: it doesn't
require going to the gym at all!

## First Steps

Rely on the teachings of [Atomic Habits](https://jamesclear.com/atomic-habits):
Create a mental trigger for a specific habit you already have, replacing it with
going for a walk. I chose to respond to my feeling of boredom, but you could
choose any specific habit you already have. Examples include if you snack often,
or if you tend to doomscroll!

Once you've created that mental trigger, keep relying on it until your new
behavior is consistent. For me, any time I became bored, I would go for a walk.
This will become a fully established habit of its own, replacing the old one
entirely.

Important to note: time and distance on your walk don't matter! In fact, there
shouldn't be a goal for walk time or distance. It's okay to miss some days, to
go further or only a few minutes others, or to go twice or more in a single day.
All that matters is that you consistently go on walks.

I personally walked through neighborhoods near me, but you could go to a park
and walk. That said, there is value in making your habit as accessible as
possible. Adding barriers to starting your walk will make it harder to establish
your habit. I had a water bottle and a change of clothes ready near my door so I
could start walking within a minute or two of wanting to do so. For myself, I
feel if I had somewhere to drive before walking, I would have been much less
successful in walking more often.

When you establish your own habit of walking on a regular basis, that will
already be more than enough to get you to a healthy lifestyle alongside a
semi-managed diet. I wanted to go further and become more physically capable,
which I discuss next.

## Expanding the habit

Growing your habit of walking to include other forms of exercise depends on your
established habit of going on regular walks. Don't overdo it here: if you try to
do too much at once, you could end up losing your habit and having to start
over. As I noted before, adding barriers to starting a walk will make it that
much more difficult to establish a habit; having pre-requisites like driving
somewhere is a barrier the same as having extra work to do on the walk is a
barrier! You should feel a natural progression from one habit to the next as you
add onto your habit of going for a walk.

My target was to go from regular walking to a full body workout, but to do that
full body workout on my walk. I'll describe how I progressed through that:

During walks, raise one arm above your head as high as you can and hold it for
as long as you can. When your arm becomes tired, lower it to your side slowly.
Follow these steps again with your other arm. Repeat this cycle as often as you
like, or feel comfortable to, on your walk. The goal in this is to gain comfort
for something more than walking, and to begin strengthening and stretching your
arms.

By the way: if you're a software developer like me, or otherwise use a computer
keyboard often, the above change to your workout will be a night and day
difference in your daily keyboard use. Workouts are already vitally important to
your long term health, but if you use a keyboard for more than an hour per day,
you'll find that arm workouts are critical to your work satisfaction! This is a
guess, but I would bet that any profession that uses their hands extensively
would benefit, such as professional musicians.

Continuing: After you've established the new habit of raising your arms, you can
move on to lifting something with weight! I make the assumption here that at
some point while establishing your walking habit, you began carrying a water
bottle as well. If so, the next part is easy.

Replace the arm raising exercise with water bottle raising- I recommend holding
it in your grip and then raising your arms (both of them!) into a T pose, then
holding that as long as possible. Still holding the bottle at length, bring your
arms together in front of you and switch the bottle into your other hand then
repeat. You can have any number of variations on this, of course.

## Frequently Asked Questions

- What if I get blisters when walking? <br>
  Buy [better socks](https://darntough.com/), then [better
  shoes](https://www.brooksrunning.com/). In the mean time, cover any hotspots
  or other potential blisters you feel you feel with
  [leukotape](https://sectionhiker.com/leukotape-blister-prevention-tape-for-running-and-hiking/).
  Personally, I wear either thick cotton socks or Darn Tough's merino wool
  socks. My shoes are Brooks Ghost 13s in a size 12.5; these were a fantastic
  upgrade for me, but I didn't need them for a long time and you may not ever
  need more than common tennis shoes.

- You wanted to turn walking into a full body workout. What about core? <br>
  Core comes naturally with certain exercises. As I began working out my arms on
  my walks, I found myself naturally flexing my core with my breathing pattern
  and when holding my water bottle at arm's length. Your mileage may vary; you
  could instead try a specific standing core workout, or try adding core
  stretches to your walk at regular intervals.

- What about back? <br>
  The arm raising workout and the followup suggesting you use your water bottle
  as a dumbbell both work your shoulders and chest alongside to your arms, but
  that's as far as that exercise will take you. I have no idea how to work out
  your back otherwise. Try a pull-up bar?

- What about thighs? <br>
  Walk uphill! You could also pause for a set of squats if you prefer, but you
  won't be able to start this as soon if you haven't finished establishing your
  walking habit.

- What about neck? <br>
  Dude, what?

- Why did you choose an arm workout over \_\_\_? <br>
  Arms don't do much during a walk. They're the obvious target to occupy during
  a period of time they would otherwise do nothing.

- Could I do \_\_\_ instead of walking? <br>
  Sure! The important thing is establishing, then building upon, your habits.
  The trick is in not pushing yourself too much or taking on too many new habits
  at once; then your habits will fall apart. I would also recommend sticking to
  something that works alongside your walk, but if you can establish a different
  habit, that's great!

- What if it's cold out? <br>
  Yeah, this is the killer. Nothing kills a habit harder than it becoming more
  difficult to do in a way that's outside your control. I recommend finding warm
  and easy to wear clothes for your walk and putting them by the door for when
  the urge hits you to go for a walk.
